- [Voiceover] The U.S.-Mexican
border is the most
heavily used corridor
for human trafficking
and drug smuggling in the United States.
The job of the border patrol agent
is one of the most dangerous
law enforcement jobs in the country.
Moments of high tension
can quickly escalate
into sheer horror.
- (speaks in foreign language)
- [Voiceover] Unpredictable
captives can turn on
the agents at any moment.
Border patrol agents work
in extreme conditions
endangering their lives
under a scorching sun
in order to save people in distress.
Hot zone operations consist of capturing
dangerous drug smugglers.
Every minute of every working day
agents have to make critical
life and death decisions
that will determine the outcome of events.
(uptempo rock music)
The Sonoran Desert is one of the deadliest
terrains on the planet with
blistering temperatures
of over 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
This unsettling yet beautiful landscape
walks a razor thin line
between life and death.
This harsh environment preys on the weak.
The desperate family of an
80-year old American man
have reported him missing
to local authorities.
Every passing minute without water
reduces his chances of surviving.
When someone is missing
in the hostile environment
of the Sonoran Desert,
Yuma's elite search and
rescue unit, BORSTAR
are called into action.
BORSTAR are border patrol agents
who specialize in tracking people down,
and are used to working against the clock.
As soon as the crew are safely buckled in,
the pilot starts the engine
and the earth slowly begins to fall away.
Within seconds, the engines hit full power
and the Black Hawk helicopter
begins to sweep through the desert
like a typhoon ripping through the sky.
(helicopter flying overhead)
In order to quickly
survey the vast landscapes
of the Sonoran Desert,
the pilot has to fly the
Black Hawk helicopter
at dangerously low altitudes,
at speeds of over 160 miles an hour.
Due to the increase of
traffic in the skies
the pilot has to maintain
a high level of awareness
about his environment at all times.
Maneuvering a two-ton
Black Hawk helicopter
requires great skill and concentration.
One mistake, one error of judgment
could lead to a deadly crash.
(radio voices)
When working in the blistering
sun of the Sonoran Desert,
BORSTAR agents have to be in top physical
and mental condition in order
to perform fearless rescues.
- You just got to be aware
that your environment is not friendly.
And if you get in trouble out there,
you're gonna become the
next person to be rescued.
You got to be a step above that.
- Say they, you know,
somebody's got to make it
five miles on foot.
Well, we have to go not only five miles,
we have to go that five miles back.
We got to be able to walk in and walk out.
So we got to go twice
as much as the next guy.
- [Voiceover] I switched it on.
I've had it on in the--
- [Voiceover] Once the
helicopter is in the vicinity
of where the elderly man was last seen,
Agents Emblem and Smith get in contact
with ground agents who
serve as their guides.
- [Voiceover] You're looking for track.
I'm gonna follow the line straight ahead
to see if anything comes to me.
- [Voiceover] Border patrol
agents are specialized
in tracking the fresh shoe
prints of distressed people.
From treads in the sands,
border patrol agents are able to determine
the size of their group, their age
and even the direction they're headed.
- Okay, I got the man right here.
Bring the Black Hawk right where I am.
Hard left, hard left.
BORSTAR guy, this guy is down hard.
- [Voiceover] Within seconds
of locating the elderly man,
the pilot skillfully maneuvers
the Black Hawk helicopter
into a secured landing position.
Agents Emblem and Smith
quickly move on to the scene.
- [Voiceover] 82, 32, 41.
- [Voiceover] This is the
moment when the adrenaline
and years of training kick in.
Sprinting over 200 yards in
life sapping temperatures
of over 120 degrees Fahrenheit
is both physically and
mentally exhausting.
One slip on the uneven terrain
could result in a broken leg.
Agent Smith's lungs and heart
are ruthlessly working overtime
as he has the extra burden of carrying
100-pound bag of medical supplies.
As soon as Agent Emblem
arrives at the scene
where the elderly man is lying,
he realizes that he has died
through heat exposure and dehydration.
Outcomes like this are a harsh reality
of the life of a BORSTAR agent.
- [Agent Tyler] Unfortunately,
this stuff happens.
This is probably everybody on the
search and rescue team's greatest fear
is getting here too late.
This is the part of the job that sucks.
- [Voiceover] Tracking someone
in the scorching Sonoran Desert
often takes time and patience,
but BORSTAR agents know all too well
that every passing second counts.
- There's been times where
we've literally showed up
and it's been, you know, a minute or two.
You know, five minutes, 10 minutes
to make the difference.
Yeah, this is pretty common.
- We're gonna be way too late to this guy.
This guy was obviously
in trouble at this point.
He's got his pants down,
he's trying to cool himself off.
He took off his shoes at some point.
This is his last minutes right here.
If we follow his foot sign south.
- [Voiceover] Before
handing the scene over
to medical investigators,
Agent Emblem tracks the
elderly man's last steps
in order to see if he can find
any of his belongings that
may be of value to his family.
It will also enable the agents
to get a positive
identification on the man.
- One of his footprints here,
he's barefoot at this time.
he's actually in his socks.
Took off his shoes,
moved around on the ground a little bit
looking for shade.
Not a whole lot to be found
out here if you look around.
We'll continue to push
him back south from here.
See, he's staggering at this point.
His steps aren't real coordinated.
He might have been going
for a morning walk,
got lost, disoriented.
Couldn't find his way back to his vehicle.
He might have bad vision.
Might not have been able to
see as far as his vehicle
and he got away from it.
It might have been nice and
cool this morning in the 80s
but once that sun comes
up it gets hot quick,
and if you're not prepared to be out here,
this kind of stuff happens unfortunately.
- [Voiceover] Once they have
finished assessing the scene,
Agents Emblem and Smith
head back to the base.
(helicopter choppy whir)
Although their faces are unknown to many,
the exploits of Yuma's
BORSTAR unit are legendary.
Agent Emblem reflects on a mission
that he will remember
for the rest of his life.
(helicopter flying overhead)
- A couple years ago,
we had a kid out here on his motorcycle.
I believe he's 14, he was
riding his motorcycle,
it's the end of a busy holiday weekend and
the kid got in a real bad accident
with the geo buggy
and ended up ripping his leg off.
Complete avulsion of
his, of one of his legs.
Our guys are out here
just getting ready to go.
They treated the kid, they stabilized him.
Helicopter came out and transported him
to Yuma Regional Medical Center.
That's probably one of
the most rewarding things.
The kid lost his leg
but surprisingly enough
he was out there a year later.
(helicopter flying overhead)
- [Voiceover] The U.S.-Mexican
border is 1,951 miles long,
crossing through the states of California,
Arizona, New Mexico and Texas.
The Tucson sector includes
the border stations
of Douglas, Naco and Nogales,
and it is the highest illegal alien
and drug trafficking corridor in the U.S..
(slow tempo music)
Nogales is a dusty border town
60 miles south of Tucson.
A 15-foot metal wall has been erected
from salvaged aircraft
carrier landing mats.
This iron curtain cuts straight through
the middle of the town,
separating Nogales from its sister town,
Nogales, Sonora,
which lies on the Mexican
side of the border.
Illegal immigrants will
travel hundreds of miles
to Nogales, Sonora hoping to be smuggled
across the U.S. border.
Day after day they try to
crawl under or over the wall
and illegally enter the United States.
In order to apprehend any terrorists,
drug smugglers and human traffickers,
Tucson's border patrol have installed
high tech tracking devices,
low light TV cameras and ground sensors.
Border patrol agents are
stationed on hillsides
looking down at everything and everybody
on both sides of the border.
Routine arrests can turn in
to life-threatening situations
as numerous agents have been attacked
with knives and other sharp objects.
Chasing undocumented intruders
can be seen as a game of cat and mouse.
The stakes are high and neither
side can afford to lose.
Agents Bob Bushell and Jim Hawkins
are two of Tucson's most experienced
border patrol agents.
They have been called in
to check one of the cameras
that's installed in a sewage tunnel
running from Mexico to the U.S..
The tunnels are often breached by brazen,
armed drug smugglers
who take deadly pot shots
at border patrol agents
if they think that they're
going to be caught.
- Might as well check it.
- We'd go down there and check it out.
- [Voiceover] Taking no chances,
Agent Bushell gets his M4 rifle ready
and moves into position
with Agent Hawkins.
They slowly move into the dark corridor
and position themselves at the entrance
of the sewage tunnel door.
One of the greatest dangers
that any border patrol agent can face
is being blindsided by armed smugglers.
(uptempo music)
Unaware if there's anyone in the tunnel,
Agents Hawkins and
Bushell brace themselves
for what could be a fatal encounter
that could cost both of them their lives.
Once in position, Agents
Hawkins and Bushell
quickly push the door open
and shine their flashlights
towards the camera.
- The door's open.
- Shine the light at the camera.
- Okay.
- [Voiceover] They
realized that the camera
has been smashed.
Agent Hawkins quickly enters the tunnel.
He has to stay alert at all times
as his visibility is restricted
narrowing his window of safety.
(bats squeaking)
- There have been people
through here very recently.
And then typically they'll come up
and they also go up
these side tunnels here.
And then they'll come out of a storm grade
on a side street hoping
our cameras don't see them.
We wouldn't go any deeper than this
normally without support
because it's a very narrow area,
and any kind of fight in here
you're in an enclosed area
and it can be very dangerous.
- [Voiceover] After inspecting the tunnel,
Agent Hawkins radios
the Tucson headquarters
and informs them that a maintenance crew
will have to come out and fix the camera.
Within an hour of leaving
the sewage tunnel,
Agents Hawkins and Bushell get a call
to chase down a group of
undocumented immigrants
that have triggered one
of the ground sensors
while walking through the Sonoran Desert.
The job of a border patrol
agent is not just risky,
it's life-threatening.
A routine search can often escalate
into a perilous situation.
- I was just finishing up a midnight shift
and I was out tracking in a canyon,
and I ran into a group of about 30 people
and the smuggler told
them that to pick up rocks
and basically kill me so they can get away
because there was only one guy.
If they got past me they
thought they'd get away.
So I had 30 people trying to surround me
and basically smash my
head in with big rocks.
- [Voiceover] Tracking a
group of illegal aliens
often takes several days.
However, it does not take long
before Agent Hawkins notices
some fresh footprints.
- This is really fresh.
- [Voiceover] Once he identifies them
and locates what direction
the prints are headed,
he begins his pursuit.
- Five, November 2--
- [Voiceover] Tracking a
set of fresh footprints
for several hours requires
a great deal of knowledge,
skill and concentration.
Border patrol agents are taught
ancient tracking skills
called cutting sign.
These hunting techniques
have been used by tribes
such as the Sioux, Navajo, Lakota,
Kickapoo and Chickasaw.
Agents Hawkins and Bushell
can look at desert vegetation
and tell you how recently a blade of grass
has been touched by a human.
They can spot a hair
snagged on a low branch,
twigs bent or broken by a passerby,
or even a single fiber strand
left by a marijuana-filled sack.
They can quickly discern
faint footprints in the desert dust.
- These are old.
You can tell by the way
the rain has textured the soil inside.
There's a new track, here's an old one.
You can see how it's
dimpled from the rain.
November Bushell. November 28--
- [Voiceover] After
tracking the illegal aliens
for nearly three hours,
Agent Hawkins calls for assistance
from one of the air units.
The pilot of the helicopter flies ahead
in the direction of the footprints
to see if he can locate
the fleeing suspect
who was trying so desperately to get away.
Years on the job have enabled
Agents Hawkins and Bushell
to gain a great deal of knowledge.
They know that patience and persistence
are as important as
technical tracking ability.
They can't push too hard in
the unforgiving Sonoran Desert
or else it will be them who will be
in need of medical attention.
Within a few minutes, the
pilot is able to locate
a suspicious-looking person
only a few hundred feet
from Agents Hawkins and Bushell.
- Bob, I've got something here.
- [Voiceover] As the
helicopter hovers above,
Agent Hawkins quickly moves
and digs a 36-year old
man out of the bush.
(slow tempo music)
- When you're in a foot pursuit
it is kind of dangerous.
You see how rough the terrain is
so you have the risk of personal injury
just falling, breaking
bones, that sort of thing.
Going off the cliff which
I've done twice already.
But also, you can't see the person's hands
or the front of their body typically.
You don't now if they have a weapon or not
and they can turn around
and open fire on you
in a matter of, you know, one second.
So it is dangerous.
And again, if you have to
put your hands on the person
and physically subdue them,
you don't know if they have
a knife on them or a gun.
So, it can get very hairy.
- [Voiceover] The pilot of the helicopter
calls for transportation.
Agent Hawkins hands him
over to a fellow agent
who will take them back to
their Nogales headquarters
where he will check to see
if he has a criminal record.
The UH-60L Black Hawk helicopter
is 64 feet long and
almost eight feet wide.
This powerful aircraft is fitted
with two twin turbo shaft engines.
Within seconds the pilot
can be racing through
the Sonoran Desert at
speeds of 180 miles an hour
and can climb to a height
of 3,000 feet in the air.
This gives the border patrol agents
the advantages of high
altitude surveillance,
peripheral vision and a
rapid speed of response.
For the pilot to get a clear view at night
of terrorists, drug smugglers
and human traffickers,
he uses lightweight night vision goggles.
The light amplification
device takes available light
from the moon or stars and intensifies it.
This gives the border patrol agents
an element of surprise
as they can emerge from darkness
and be on top of their
assailants before they know it.
For Yuma's border patrol agents,
the night shift is the busiest
and the most dangerous time
to patrol the U.S.-Mexican border.
Smugglers of drugs and
people will stop at nothing
in order to ferry their cargo
to its drop off point in the U.S..
(helicopter choppy whir)
They will dash across the desert
with little care for anyone
who gets in their way.
30 minutes after takeoff
and the radio is already buzzing
with urgent calls for assistance.
Agent Emblem responds
to a high speed chase
between a ground agent and
a driver in a white van
who's traveling at 70 miles
an hour down the highway.
The van contains a smuggler
and 10 undocumented immigrants
who are packed airtight in the back.
- Right now we got us
a large group down here
just came in on the west side of San Luis.
They're down in the sudangrass.
We're gonna see if we
can light up the area
and find out further (mumbles).
Okay. Yeah, we got it.
We got it.
- [Voiceover] There you go.
- [Agent Tyler] Okay, keep moving.
Okay guys, vehicle is
northbound on (mumbles),
it's gonna be a white four-door SUV
West of Foothills Boulevard.
- [Voiceover] As soon as
Agent Emblem spots the van,
he illuminates it.
This permits the ground agents
to lock on to its location.
- [Voiceover] G326 (mumbles)--
- [Voiceover] Suddenly, the smuggler
takes a sharp turn to the right
and heads off into the desert.
The dangers are rapidly heightened
when the smuggler turns off his headlights
in an attempt to get
away from the oncoming
border patrol agents.
Such reckless action puts the undocumented
immigrants in immense danger.
The smuggler can't see more
than a few feet in front of his van.
If he hits a divot then it
could catapult the vehicle
killing everybody inside it.
- [Agent Tyler] Yeah, they
said there was a group of--
- [Voiceover] Agent Emblem has been a
border patrol agent for over nine years,
and still to this day
he can't come to terms
with smuggler's utter
disrespect for human life.
- It's a business to them.
They need to get their
human cargo if you will
from Mexico to the
smugglers on the U.S. side
as quick as possible.
And then they go back and
they smuggle another group.
If they lose a few on the way,
I don't think they'd care less.
I think what they do is despicable.
The best part of our job
is when we catch them.
- [Voiceover] Even though
the smuggler is aware
of the pursuing helicopter,
he continues to press on the accelerator,
barreling through the desert
at over 50 miles an hour.
- [Voiceover] Further
are throwing rocks at us.
- [Agent Tyler] He's
coming up on that first
turn intersection there, guys.
Right underneath the hawk.
- [Voiceover] He suddenly
makes an abrupt right turn
and heads for a suburban area
only a few feet from the desert highway.
- [Agent Tyler] If you
guys get into position
just underneath the hawk here.
He's bound underneath the
hawk on the black top.
- [Voiceover] The police and land agents
come swarming from all directions.
- [Agent Tyler] Okay, I'm
gonna light the guy up now.
- [Voiceover] Yeah.
- [Voiceover] Light him up.
- [Agent Tyler] He's going north one block
west of Fortuna Road.
- [Voiceover] The chase
comes to an abrupt stop
and the occupants make a run for it.
- [Agent Tyler] Okay
guys, they're bailing out.
They're bailing out.
- [Voiceover] Agent Emblem
relays the information
to the ground agents
who then begin to chase down the smuggler
and the illegal immigrants.
- [Agent Tyler] We need body,
we need to get some people
over here ASAP guys.
- [Agent Boone] They're running, okay.
I got a guy in the front
yard, the guys on the field.
Tell them to stop, they're
gonna come out the field.
- [Voiceover] The Black
Hawk continues to hover
over the housing estate
allowing Agent Emblem to
comb the nearby gardens,
fields and alleyways,
flushing out several of
the illegal immigrants.
- [Voiceover] I just had a
flare out on the night sun.
- You just got to keep hammering
on it, it will come on.
- [Voiceover] All right.
- Turn to your right.
Right there.
There you go.
- [Voiceover] When one
of the ground agents
heads into a nearby field,
Agent Emblem illuminates it with the beam
providing him with enough light
to safely apprehend
four illegal immigrants.
- [Agent Tyler] Charlie,
how many bodies do you have?
- [Voiceover] Nine.
(speaks in foreign language) Alcaraz.
- [Voiceover] As soon as the last
of the illegal immigrants are in custody,
Agent Emblem knows that his job is done
and he and the rest of the
crew head back to base.
(slow tempo music)
Agents Boone Smith and Tyler Emblem
finished their shift by
checking in their M4 rifles.
Tomorrow brings another day
that will put their
survival skills to the test
as they continue to secure
the U.S.-Mexican border.
The following morning and Sonoran Desert
seems at peace with the world.
It covers a region of more
than 100,000 square miles.
An arid and rugged place,
riddled with hundreds of
deep canyons and caves
that offers superb coverage
for the hundreds of
thousands of illegal aliens
that cross the U.S. border annually.
The BORSTAR team start
their afternoon shift
in a relaxed manner.
The mood changes when Agent Tyler Emblem
gets a call to survey the Colorado River
as there has been a sighting
of several intruders
attempting to cross into the U.S..
(slow tempo music)
- We got a group of aliens that
jumped the border fence
and they're skirting
the edge of the canal.
There's usually two routes
that they can take in this area
where they cross down along the water,
along the edge of the All-American Canal
or up and over this hill up
here called Garcia's Hill.
- [Voiceover] Also en
route is Agent Boone Smith.
As temperatures rise to 125 degrees,
the state of Arizona is
currently experiencing
one of the most severe
heatwaves in the last 10 years.
Agent Smith and Emblem arrive at the river
and are joined by Agent Michael Bailey
who is carrying an M4 rifle.
- [Agent Michael] Yes, I do.
- [Agent Tyler] What's that?
- [Agent Boone] Which
side are you gonna be on?
- [Voiceover] Once they are
ready, they head upstream.
Agent Smith and Emblem know these waters
like the back of their hands.
They know every trail where
illegal aliens hide out.
Although the water looks quite calm,
the border patrol agents
never underestimate their terrain.
The river is notoriously known
for its deceivingly fast under currents
and steep non-negotiable banks.
10-foot reeds restrict their view.
Without being able to see
what's on the other side,
border patrol agents run the risk
of having rocks thrown at them
or even being shot at.
- All right here, guys, on the right.
We're pulling right over here.
- [Voiceover] Agent Emblem
spots movement to his right.
He carefully steers the
boat towards the bank.
- We're gonna grab a line too.
- [Voiceover] Once they hit land,
Agent Smith and Bailey
head through the thick,
dense, snake-infested bush
where temperatures rise
to over 140 degrees.
Throughout a 12-hour shift,
each agent must drink
up to a gallon of water
if he is to avoid severe dehydration.
The border terrain is no
place for the faint-hearted
as Agent Smith and Bailey
are constantly bitten by mosquitoes.
They also have to walk and crawl over land
that is littered a foot
deep with broken bottles,
soiled disposable diapers,
clothes and syringes.
When pursuing illegal aliens,
Agent Smith and Bailey have
their senses on full alert.
They know they could
be ambushed at any time
with little space to maneuver.
- Right up around that next corner
there could be a group
or there could be, you
know, people waiting for you
or just dug into the brush.
It's really risky coming
through these trails like this.
You know, these maze of trails
and trying to find the
group that you want to find.
Not to mention that it's
real tough to cut sign on,
it's almost near impossible.
So, the best you can do is
know where the aliens went in
and just pursue them.
- [Voiceover] For many illegal aliens,
the journey to the U.S.
is the ultimate dream.
Unfortunately, for others the road leads
to a parched, everlasting hell.
- For a lot of times,
the smugglers will give
the aliens medication essentially speed
which increases their heart rate,
increases the body
temperature, causes dehydration
and act as diuretics,
and it will dehydrate the people even more
but they could keep going
without stopping to eat.
And, you know, they get that kind of rush.
They get the rush from the
speed to sort of keep going.
The smugglers will give them medication
and not even tell them,
you know, what it is.
They're like, "Here, take this pill.
"Here, take this pill."
It will keep giving them speed as they go
so that just compounds the fact
you know, the heat factors on them
and the dehydration factors on them.
So a lot of these people are,
have taken medication and stuff
and we'll find caffeine pills
and ephedra pills on aliens all the time,
aliens and smugglers all the time.
- [Voiceover] After
tracking for over an hour,
Agents Bailey and Smith
are unable to catch up
with the group of illegal immigrants
who have been squatting in the reeds.
They take a few moments
to pay their respects
to a fellow agent who perished
while trying to capture a smuggler
and saved the lives of
several illegal aliens.
- This right here is a
monument to Agent James Epling
that died out here on December 16th, 2003.
He was chasing a group of
aliens right off of here,
it was the winter time.
The aliens were I believe
Chinese immigrants.
So he's yelling at them
in Spanish and English
and weren't understanding of him.
They've been out in
the middle of the river
on a sandbar for quite some time.
Agent Epling went out, rescued the aliens
and was passing them up
to his partner and said,
"I'm gonna go after a smuggler."
He was standing about
knee-deep water at this time.
So he took off after the smuggler
who was on an air tube and
starting to float back south
and he took off running
in this knee-deep water.
The depth changed,
kind of fell into a
hole near as we can tell
and ended up drowning in the line of duty.
- [Voiceover] Coyotes are individuals
that are secretly hired to smuggle
illegal immigrants into the United States.
Mexican drug smugglers will
often use them as decoys
so that the border patrol agents
will focus all their efforts
trying to capture them
while the drug smugglers ferry their cargo
into the U.S. without being detected.
The coyotes will transport up to
100 illegal immigrants at a time.
If any of them fall behind,
the coyotes will not think twice
about leaving them to
perish in the desert.
Pregnant women and
children have been found
severely dehydrated only
a few minutes from death.
(slow tempo music)
The life of a border patrol
agent is a never ending drill,
often with life and death stakes.
Agent Jones spends over 10 hours a day
perched on a hill that overlooks
the U.S.-Mexican border.
He is constantly on the
lookout for terrorists,
drug smugglers and illegal aliens
trying to cross the border,
as well as snipers who
use high-powered weapons
to fire at border patrol agents.
(slow tempo music)
Just when they thought the
day was coming to an end,
Agents Hawkins and Bushell get a call
to say that there has been a sighting
of around 20 illegal aliens
who are being escorted across
the border by a coyote.
As soon as they get within a few miles
with the group of illegal aliens,
Agent Hawkins hits the gas.
He test the truck's every
component to the maximum
as it picks up speed around every corner.
When pursuing someone at high speed,
a border patrol agent
needs nerves of steel.
There is no room for hesitation
when hurdling your truck through
the desert's narrow roads
and traveling at dangerous speeds
of over 50 miles an hour.
It only takes one mistake
to catapult the truck into a ditch.
Several border patrol agents
have already been killed
when their truck hit a divot
in the road and crashed.
- I'll drop you off and I'll go up here.
- [Voiceover] In order to
corner off the illegal aliens,
Agent Bushell jumps out of the truck
and heads off into the desert,
while Agent Hawkins speeds
off towards the border
flying over bumps and
skidding around corners.
Agent Hawkins has to stay alert
as he chases down the coyote
who is trying to make
his way back to Mexico.
Despite all of his training
and protective equipment,
Agent Hawkins never knows
how the situation is going to play out.
Agent Jones is supporting
tactical operations
by watching every move
that Agent Hawkins makes.
- [Voiceover] As soon as Agent Hawkins
handcuffs the coyote,
he hauls him to his feet
and marches him back to his truck.
- (speaks in foreign language)
- [Voiceover] Agent Hawkins
has to constantly scan the area
as he never knows who else is out there.
One thing is for sure,
border patrol agents
are constantly watched
by drug smugglers on the
Mexican side of the border.
- The immediate danger is the
person you're dealing with.
You don't know who you have
until you get them back and screened
and put through the system.
You have to treat that individual
as if they are a threat
until you have them secure.
Handcuffed in a vehicle, properly searched
and they'd no longer pose a threat.
But while you're doing that,
you also have to be aware
of your surroundings.
There could be somebody else out there,
somebody trying to come up behind you.
If you don't have a partner
or a camera watching
your back, it's up to you
and you have to be aware
of your surroundings
because if you focus on
that one person too much,
you'll get what we call tunnel vision.
And at that point somebody
could walk up behind you
and take you out while
you're trying to deal
with the other person.
- [Voiceover] With the
coyote safely secured,
Agent Hawkins drives a half mile down hill
to help process the 17 illegal immigrants
that were caught by Agent Bushell.
(dog whining)
Arizona has become the principle
and deadliest gateway
for illegal immigrants.
It accounts for nearly 1/3
of the 1.5 million people
captured illegally crossing
the border each year.
An average of 400 people die every year
while attempting to cross
the border from Mexico to the U.S..
They are willing to risk everything,
even death under the scorching sun
to get to their destination.
(slow tempo music)
Agent Tyler Emblem has
been tracking a large group
of illegal aliens throughout
the Sonoran Desert
for over three hours.
- We're going up to the north river area
on the Arizona side of the Colorado River.
There's a lot of people
crossing in this area.
It's one of the busiest
if not the busiest area
of the United States right now
for illegal border crossers.
This is pretty much ground
zero where we're at.
- [Voiceover] While tracking at night,
border patrol agents do
it from their Hummers
in order to cover more
ground in less time.
Agent Emblem is able to
track a set of prints
by shining his flashlight
along the ground.
(slow tempo music)
Working alone at night can be daunting
for even the most experienced
border patrol agent.
Agent Emblem has to keep cool at all times
especially when moving
through the narrow reeds
near the water's edge.
If he was ambushed by
armed drug smugglers,
he would have little room
to maneuver or escape.
- Just checking the water's edge
to see if there's any groups
that have crossed here on the rafts
that would be making their way up
along the river trail here.
As you can see, it's real easy
for them to hide down in here.
You won't know they were here
unless you got out on foot
and came down here looking for them.
You can't just stay in your vehicle.
You got to get down here and
beat the brush with the aliens down here.
You can see right here where
they came out of the water.
There's a barefoot right here
and a couple running W tennis shoes.
They'll swim across or
raft across right here
and then they'll make their way
along the edge of the river,
see a thick brush here.
It's real easy for them to get
right back across the river.
It's only maybe 50 yards here to my left.
- [Voiceover] Agent Emblem
picks up fresh foot signs
and is able to locate the direction
the group of illegal aliens is going in.
Once on the move, Agent Emblem radios
Agent Boone Smith for assistance.
- 10-4.
- [Voiceover] He then heads back north
into the heart of the Sonoran Desert.
Tracking illegal aliens can
be a frightening experience
especially when it's a
large group of people.
- Well, when we're out
here working in the desert
we typically come across,
it's usually groups of people,
large groups of people.
It's not just you know,
one on one or one on two,
you know, there's one agent
for probably, you know, 20, 30.
Sometimes 40 people.
And one of the biggest groups I ever had
it was me, two other guys
and we had 99 people out here.
If a group was really
willing and really aggressive
they could turn on the agent
and then you're in a really bad situation.
You're outnumbered
and your backup could be you know,
20, 30 to 40 minutes away.
That's if you can get to
your radio to call for help.
When that happens you got
to control the situation.
You offer a strong, confident presence,
a lot of the times that's good enough.
The important thing is to go
home at the end of the night.
You know, go home safe
and do your job as best to your ability.
- Agent Emblem has to pay attention
and focus on where the tracks are going
as there are various footprints
heading in different directions.
- You really, really have to concentrate
on this stuff out here when it
gets into this harder ground
because there's so many other groups
that have crossed out here.
You lose concentration
just for a little bit,
you go to pick up your radio or
just take your eyes off
it for a little bit,
get on the wrong stuff and spend
a little bit of time trying
to straighten things out.
You get up here into the softer sand
it will be a little bit easier.
- [Voiceover] Even though tracking down
illegal intruders can take a long time,
Agents Emblem and Smith
are working against the clock.
They can tell by the footprints
there are small children in the group.
If they do not apprehend
the group before sunrise,
then by midday, the young and the old
will stand little chance of surviving
the penetrating heat of the desert.
- Got them up here, Boone.
I got to throw him the overheads him now
that I've got the foot sign up here.
All right, the chase is on.
(uptempo music)
- [Voiceover] Agent Smith hits the gas
and his truck accelerates
through the desert.
He knows that he is Agent
Emblem's only backup
within 10 square miles.
- And here they are.
Okay, Boone, I got bodies here.
Can just light up.
- [Voiceover] Once Agent Emblem catches up
to the group of illegal immigrants,
he stops his truck and instructs them
to stand up slowly and put
their hands on their head.
- (speaks in foreign language)
- [Voiceover] He then tells
them to get into a single file.
Agent Smith arrives on the scene
with a 50-year old man that
was hiding behind the bush.
Illegal immigrants are
willing to risk everything
in order to get to a safe house
in the U.S. border town.
They will often travel
through the sun-seered terrain
for numerous days on
end with little water.
- And this little one here is four.
This is a perfect example of a group,
you'll get out here.
Right now it's 1:00 in the morning.
You look north up here
there's nothing but open desert.
This group gets out here.
It doesn't look to me
like they have much water
and we'll check here in a minute
but come sunrise, eight,
9:00 in the morning,
it's gonna be 90 degrees at
eight, 9:00 in the morning.
By 10:00 it might already be 100.
You meet a group like with
these kids, they can't keep up,
you're just looking for problems here.
There are the groups that
it's important we catch
before they get too far north
and they get into the danger zones.
- When we have kids, the
parents over compensate.
There's women out here who
will be carrying their kids
and just they can't, they
suffer from heat distress,
heat illness, dehydration.
And like I had mentioned earlier,
there's times where
you'll find the children
and they're still alive and
they're still doing fine
but the mother is dead
because she's been carrying
the children across,
you know, across a hot desert all day,
and given the children all her water.
The young males that have
made this trip a couple times,
they're healthy, they're in good shape.
They can usually fight through this stuff
but it's the young kids,
the women, the older people,
they're gonna have real problems
crossing this desert in day or night.
I have a daughter that's
one of those kid's age
and I'll tell you, I would never ever
put my kids through what these guys
are putting their kids through tonight.
Not in a million years.
- Six, two? Tres?
So we got nine bottles of water here,
that's total of maybe
four gallons of water
in whole for one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight,
nine, 10, 11, 12 people.
So, four gallons for 12 people.
This is an accident
waiting to happen out here.
- [Voiceover] After
Agents Emblem and Smith
have checked that the group
are not suffering from dehydration,
they begin to search the bags
of those they suspect are smugglers.
- [Voiceover] When apprehending smugglers,
border patrol agents have
to interpret their actions
in a fraction of a second
as events can spiral out of control.
While Agent Emblem searches the coyotes,
Agent Smith checks their
bags for concealed weapons.
- This guy's got a cellphone battery.
He's got inside his bag there.
This guy is probably our smuggler.
We'll talk to the FOIs on duty tonight
when we get back to the station.
This guy's a little bit shady.
Okay.
(speaks in foreign language)
- They're young, they're in the front.
They don't really fit in.
You know, you got a bunch of young kids
and families and stuff
and then these two guys,
or this guy right here.
I think this guy is, I don't know.
We'll have to look into it more.
- (speaks in foreign language)
That's it.
Okay.
(speaks in foreign language)
- [Voiceover] Once all
of the illegal aliens
are in the truck,
they are taken to a holding center in Yuma
where they will stay overnight
before they are deported back to Mexico.
On a quiet road less than a mile outside
the city of Nogales, Arizona,
Agents Hawkins and Bushell
are sitting quietly in their truck.
They are awaiting orders
to assist fellow agents
who have been tipped off
about the illegal import
of over 200 pounds of marijuana
into the United States.
They gear up testing
their night vision goggles
that turn the night from dense blackness
punctured by stars,
into an eerie green-tinted landscape
on which they can see every bush,
and on which people show
up like glowing ghosts.
- [Voiceover] Head November 583, 10-98.
- [Voiceover] As soon
as they've been informed
that there's been a
sighting of several mules
who are responsible for
transporting the marijuana,
they move into action.
U.S. border patrol agents
are a special breed
of law enforcement officers.
At night, the U.S.-Mexican border
can become a place of incredible violence.
(thunder rumbles)
- You need those extra mags, Bob?
- [Agent Bob] No.
- [Agent Jim] Okay.
- [Voiceover] Agent Bushell
quickly checks his M4 rifle
as a split second decision
makes the difference
between life and death.
(dog barking)
The border patrol agents
begin the comb the hillside
in search of drug smugglers.
While some agents search for the drugs,
others stand guard,
as their biggest fear
is the sharp shooters
that work for the drug smugglers.
They only have to pop their heads
over the fence for a split second,
and it could result in
the death of an agent.
- This close to the fence
is especially (mumbles).
Now we can't chase them into Mexico
and they'll stand on the
Mexican side and shoot at us.
So that's why we waited
until we had critical mass
and a lot of support agents.
And when we go up here,
we come up in force.
You notice, none of the guys
have their flashlights on
so we're using light discipline.
None of them are really talking very loud
because we don't want to
give our positions away.
It's still very hard to see at night.
Typically we wouldn't jump
narcotics as close to the fence
but they're only going
to this neighborhood
right down here to a safe house
so it's a matter of two minutes
before they get to where they need to go.
So we had to jump them
as quickly as possible
and it's a very dangerous
situation for us.
- [Voiceover] Agents
continue to sweep the area
unearthing every hiding place,
searching for the mules
and the shipment of drugs.
(thunder rumbles)
- The camera's picked
up two more of the mules
and they're running to the east.
They were just down right here
and we picked them up
on our infrared cameras.
And Bob is actually
the closest one to them
so he's gonna go try to
see if he can find them.
- [Voiceover] There is no room for error
or second guessing a
fellow agent's actions.
Everything has to run
smoothly and without a hitch
as their lives are on the line.
(slow tempo music)
An agent finds several
containers of marijuana.
The smugglers have abandoned their cargo
and headed back across the border.
As soon as they feel their job is done,
border patrol agents start
pulling out of the danger zone.
- [Agent Jim] He's
gonna run his dog again.
- [Voiceover] Although
no arrests were made,
the agents seized over
200 pounds of marijuana.
If they did not take control
of the marijuana then,
within days it would have been sold
on street corners throughout the U.S..
It's estimated that nearly
half the $65 billion
U.S. worth of narcotics
bought by Americans each year
comes through Mexico.
As much as 90% of cocaine
sold in the United States
is smuggled through the Mexican territory.
Mexico is also the number
two supplier of heroin
and the largest foreign
source of marijuana.
- (speaks in foreign language)
- [Voiceover] It's 3 am and agent Emblem
has caught his fifth
group of illegal aliens.
- (speaks in foreign language)
Okay.
- [Voiceover] Even though
he understands their quest
for a better life in the United States,
he is bound to his duty to uphold the law.
- You just never know who's coming in.
Yeah, it's true, majority
of the people want to come
and earn an honest living.
I understand that but
people need to come through
the front door here.
We have immigration laws
that are set up for a reason
and they should be followed.
We need to assure that people that
wish to do this country harm
and the people that live
in this country harm,
we need to make sure that we,
that we're there to intercept them
as they cross our border.
That's what everybody does
out here day in and day out,
night in and night out.
There's people working this border
to intercept everybody that comes in.
Some do get away and we hope
that they're not bad ones.
(uptempo music)